---
layout: post
title: Anole Fieldwork in Jamaica!
date: 2022-05-11 21:01:00
description: Assisting Inbar Maayan in Jamaica
tags: field
categories: 
---

For three weeks this summer, I was fortunate to be able to assist graduate student [Inbar Maayan](http://www.inbarmaayan.com/) in the field studying Jamaican anoles! I'm extremely grateful to have had the opportunity to study anoles in the field for the first time 
in a place as beautiful as Jamaica. One of the most rewarding parts of this trip was getting to see my study species, _Anolis grahami_, in their natural habitat - they are truly magnificent lizards! Being naturalists, we used this opportunity to look for other 
animal species as well, like the [Jamaican Tody](https://ebird.org/species/jamtod1) and the [Magnificent Frigatebird](https://ebird.org/species/magfri)! Jamaica is such a lovely island and I can't 
wait to go back!

For more information about the research project, visit [Inbar Maayan's Website](http://www.inbarmaayan.com/research.html)!

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/group_pic.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/summit_group.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

*** 

## Meet the Jamaican Anoles!

Jamaican anoles form a monophyletic group of 7 anoles: _Anolis grahami_, _Anolis garmani_, _Anolis conspersus_, _Anolis opalinus_, _Anolis lineatopus_, _Anolis reconditus_, and _Anolis valencienni_. All of these species are endemic to Jamaica except for _Anolis 
conspersus_, which is endemic to Grand Cayman and not found in Jamaica. There is also an introduced population of _Anolis sagrei_ on the island.

#### **_Anolis grahami_**

This anole is native to Jamamica and has more recently been introduced to Bermuda. They are a trunk-crown ecomorph, meaning that they are found from around eye-level on the tree up to the canopy and have a long snout, slender body, and shorter legs with 
well-developed toepads. We currently have two recognized subspecies: _Anolis grahami grahami_ and _Anolis grahami aquarum_. _A. g. grahami_ is a beautiful rainbow color and is found throughout most of Jamaica, while _A. g. aquarum_ is restricted to certain areas on 
the Eastern side of the island and is a striking lime green color.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/grahami_grahami.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/grahami_aquarum.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left: A. g. grahami. Right: A. g. aquarum.
</div> 

_A. grahami_ is one of the few species of anoles that vocalize! There are actually a few Jamaican anole species that vocalize including _A. garmani_, _A. opalinus_, and _A. valencienni_. To read about other vocalizing anoles, check out this [blog 
post](https://www.anoleannals.org/2013/10/28/on-vocalizing-anoles/). 

My recent work has been focused on assembling a chromosome-scale reference genome for this species, which enables us to answer a suite of questions about _A. grahami_ and the Jamaican anole clade. To read more about this project, [click 
here](https://alyssavanerelli.github.io/projects/1_project/).

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/grahami_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/grahami_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/grahami_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Anolis grahami grahami
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/grahami_4.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/grahami_5.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Anolis grahami aquarum
</div>

#### **_Anolis garmani_**

This crown-giant anole is the largest species of Jamaican lizard. They are usually found high in trees on trunks or branches and have a large head. This species, often called Sawback, has a spiky crest running down the back, although females and juvenilles sometimes 
don't possess this feature. They also have these characteristic stripes on the sides of the body. 

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/garmani_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/garmani_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/garmani_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Anolis garmani (3 adult males)
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/garmani_4.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Anolis garmani (juvenille)
</div>


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/garmani_5.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/garmani_6.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Anolis garmani (left to right: juvenille and female). The stripes are very prevalent in these photos!
</div>


#### **_Anolis opalinus_**

_Anolis opalinus_ is the smallest anole species found on the island, but they have a large dewlap for their size! These anoles possess a light stripe that starts at the chin and runs down the side of the body. Coloration and body pattern vary throughout the island.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/opalinus_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Adult male Anolis opalinus
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/opalinus_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/opalinus_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Anolis opalinus males displaying their beautiful dewlaps!
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/opalinus_4.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/opalinus_5.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/opalinus_6.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

#### **_Anolis lineatopus_**

This species is a trunk-ground anole, meaning they are a medium-sized lizard with long hindlimbs found usually on tree trunks perching head downward. _Anolis lineatopus_ is by far the most common species of anole in Jamaica. There is a lot of pattern and color 
variation throughout the island, but generally _A. lineatopus_ has a thin, light line along the sides of the body and striped legs, hence the common name "stripe footed anole." There are currently four recognized subspecies: ahenobarbus, lineatopus, merope, and neckeri.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Anolis lineatopus lineatopus
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_4.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_5.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_6.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_8.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_7.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>


#### **_Anolis reconditus_**

_Anolis reconditus_, the Blue Mountains anole, is found exclusively in the Blue Mountains. This elusive, high-elevation anole is usually found in rock crevices near flowing water. This species is a large-bodied lizard in which both males and females have dewlaps, and
because these anoles live in dark rock crevices, they have very large eyes. 

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/reconditus_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

#### **_Anolis valencienni_**

_Anolis valencienni_ is a cryptic twig anole. This species is found primarily on twigs and branches, and moves very slowly in order to stay hidden in the trees. They have very short limbs, a prehensile tail, and a strong bite! Their mottled color pattern helps them blend
 into their surroundings. Both males and females have large dewlaps in this species and dewlap color varies from black to pink/purple to yellow.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/valencienni_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/valencienni_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/valencienni_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/valencienni_4.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/valencienni_5.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/valencienni_6.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>


#### **Bonus! _Anolis sagrei_**

Although not a Jamaican anole, _Anolis sagrei_ has made its way to the island! This is a trunk-ground species that is native to Cuba and the Bahamas, but has invaded areas globally.

I am currently working on a project investigating the genetic component of large body size evolution in the _Anolis sagrei_ clade. [Click here](https://alyssavanerelli.github.io/projects/2_project/) to read more about this research!

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/sagrei_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/sagrei_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/sagrei_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>



---
## Exploring Jamaican Wildlife

While sampling for anoles around the island, we had the opportunity to observe many of the other animal species that reside in Jamaica, including many endemic species. Jamaica is home to many 
magnificent birds, frogs, insects, lizards, and more! The photos below are only a portion of the amazing species we saw along the way.

Special thanks to Damany Calder (pictured below) for helping me identify many of these species, and for being a great friend! Check out his [instagram](https://www.instagram.com/wildlifejamaica/) 
page where he posts about the biology and conservation of Jamaican wildlife!

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/group.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    From left to right: Damany Calder, Treya Picking, Ansley Petherick, and me.
</div>

#### Other Herps

Jamaica is home to more herps than anoles, such as the Jamaican croaking lizard, _Aristelliger praesignis_, and the Jamaican blind snake, _Typhlops jamaicensis_!

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/aristelliger.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The Jamaican croaking lizard, Aristelliger praesignis. We often ran into these geckos hanging out in tree crevices while we were searching the area for anoles.
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/typhlops_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/typhlops_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The Jamaican blind snake, Typhlops jamaicensis. 
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/frog_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Jamaican laughing frog, Osteopilus ocellatus)
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/frog_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/frog_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    frog species
</div>

#### Birds

Throughout this trip, I always kept my copy of _A Photographic Guide to the Birds of Jamaica_ by Ann Hayes-Sutton, Audrey Downer, and Robert Sutton handy to identify bird species on the island. We 
spotted so many spectacular birds on our various sampling trips including the [Streamertail](https://ebird.org/species/stream1), which is the national bird of Jamaica, as well as the endemic 
[Jamaican Tody](https://ebird.org/species/jamtod1).


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/tody_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/tody_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Jamaican Tody, Todus todus.
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/mango_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/mango_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Jamaican Mango, Anthracothorax mango.
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/woodpecker_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/woodpecker_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Jamaican Woodpecker, Melanerpes radiolatus.
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/egret.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/parakeet.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left to right: Cattle Egret, Bubulcus ibis. Olive-throated Parakeets, Eupsittula nana.
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kestrel.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    American Kestrel, Falco sparverius.
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/frig_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/frig_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Magnificent Frigatebird, Fregata magnificens.
</div>

#### Insects

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left to right:
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_4.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_5.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_6.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption"> 
    Left to right:
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_7.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_8.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left to right:
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_9.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_10.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/insect_11.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left to right: spider, Scarlet Skimmer, and Leptinotarsa decemlineata
</div>

---
## Field

Some fun photos from the field!

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/field_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/field_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/field_4.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/field_5.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/field_6.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_9.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/lineatopus_10.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

---
I am truly beyond grateful for the time that I spent in Jamaica! Not only did I get the chance to assist in some amazing anole research, I made some wonderful friends while doing so. I cannot wait 
for the next time I can visit this incredible place.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/friend_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/friend_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/friend_3.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/overlook.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
